---
layout: post
title: Hate
---

# Lets Talk About Hate

-Donald Trump is quite the [talker](http://time.com/4367120/orlando-shooting-donald-trump-transcript/).

{{ Donald Trump, Rally in Manchester, New Hampshire }}
When I am elected, I will suspend immigration from areas of the world where there is a proven history of terrorism against the U.S., Europe or our allies, until we fully understand how to end these threats.
{{ endblockquote }}

### Many of the recent mass killings in the U.S have been committed by home grown terrorists; people who were born in the United States.

The problem is not immigration, it is a culture of hate and of fear which people like Donald Trump are proliferating as a means to win the votes of Americans. Trump has no idea what it feels like to feel frightened and unsafe because of who he is. Not everyone is as lucky as he. Anyone who has lived as a part of a marginalized group - women, LGBTQ people, racial minorities, people living in poverty - these people have experienced things of which Donald Trump knows nothing, and for which he cares little. These are the people who know best that answering intolerance with intolerance does nothing.

Dont give into fearing the unknown, embrace it. Fear is what causes people to hate and to rage. \"Hate begets hate; violence begets violence; toughness begets a greater toughness. We must meet the forces of hate with the power of love.\" These insane events will continue to happen until we can change our culture of fear and hate into one of acceptance and love.
Many will use this weekend\'s murders as a means to justify hate. Islamophobia, homophobia, sexism, racism, they\'re all the same and they all need to stop.
